Chapter 8: Earned Safe and Sick Time Act.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2013/046.
§ 20-911 Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Earned Safe and Sick Time Act."
(Am. L.L. 2017/199, 11/6/2017, eff. 5/5/2018; Am. L.L. 2020/097, 9/28/2020, eff. 9/30/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2013/046.
§ 20-912 Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
   Calendar year. The term “calendar year” means a regular and consecutive twelve month period, as determined by an employer.
   Caregiver. The term “caregiver” means a person who provides direct and ongoing care for a minor child or a care recipient.
   Care recipient. The term “care recipient” means a person with a disability, including a temporary disability, who (i) is the caregiver’s family member or resides in the caregiver’s household and (ii) relies on the caregiver for medical care or to meet the needs of daily living.
   Chain business. The term “chain business” means any employer that is part of a group of establishments that share a common owner or principal who owns at least thirty percent of each establishment where such establishments (i) engage in the same business or (ii) operate pursuant to franchise agreements with the same franchisor as defined in general business law section 681; provided that the total number of employees of all such establishments in such group is at least five.
   Child. The term “child” means a biological, adopted or foster child, a legal ward, or a child of an employee standing in loco parentis.
   Commissioner. The term “commissioner” means the commissioner of consumer and worker protection.
   Department. The term “department” means the department of consumer and worker protection.
   Domestic partner. The term “domestic partner” means any person who has a registered domestic partnership pursuant to section 3-240 of the code, a domestic partnership registered in accordance with executive order number 123, dated August 7, 1989, or a domestic partnership registered in accordance with executive order number 48, dated January 7, 1993.
   Domestic worker. The term “domestic worker” means any person who provides care for a child, companionship for a sick, convalescing or elderly person, housekeeping, or any other domestic service in a home or residence.
   Employee. The term “employee” means any "employee" as defined in subdivision 2 of section 190 of the labor law who is employed for hire within the city of New York who performs work on a full-time or part-time basis, including work performed in a transitional jobs program pursuant to section 336-f of the social services law, but not including work performed as a participant in a work experience program pursuant to section 336-c of the social services law, and not including those who are employed by (i) the United States government; (ii) the state of New York, including any office, department, independent agency, authority, institution, association, society or other body of the state including the legislature and the judiciary; or (iii) the city of New York or any local government, municipality or county or any entity governed by section 92 of the general municipal law or section 207 of the county law.
   Employer. The term “employer” means any "employer" as defined in subdivision (3) of section 190 of the labor law, but not including (i) the United States government; (ii) the state of New York, including any office, department, independent agency, authority, institution, association, society or other body of the state including the legislature and the judiciary; or (iii) the city of New York or any local government, municipality or county or any entity governed by general municipal law section 92 or county law section 207. In determining the number of employees performing work for an employer for compensation during a given week, all employees performing work for compensation on a full-time, part-time or temporary basis shall be counted, provided that where the number of employees who work for an employer for compensation per week fluctuates, business size may be determined for the current calendar year based upon the average number of employees who worked for compensation per week during the preceding calendar year, and provided further that in determining the number of employees performing work for an employer that is a chain business, the total number of employees in that group of establishments shall be counted.
   Family member. The term “family member” means an employee's child, spouse, domestic partner, parent, sibling, grandchild or grandparent; the child or parent of an employee's spouse or domestic partner; any other individual related by blood to the employee; and any other individual whose close association with the employee is the equivalent of a family relationship.
   Family offense matter. The term “family offense matter” means an act or threat of an act that may constitute disorderly conduct, harassment in the first degree, harassment in the second degree, aggravated harassment in the second degree, sexual misconduct, forcible touching, sexual abuse in the third degree, sexual abuse in the second degree as set forth in subdivision 1 of section 130.60 of the penal law, stalking in the first degree, stalking in the second degree, stalking in the third degree, stalking in the fourth degree, criminal mischief, menacing in the second degree, menacing in the third degree, reckless endangerment, strangulation in the first degree, strangulation in the second degree, criminal obstruction of breathing or blood circulation, assault in the second degree, assault in the third degree, an attempted assault, identity theft in the first degree, identity theft in the second degree, identity theft in the third degree, grand larceny in the fourth degree, grand larceny in the third degree or coercion in the second degree as set forth in subdivisions 1, 2 and 3 of section 135.60 of the penal law between spouses or former spouses, or between parent and child or between members of the same family or household.
   Grandchild. The term “grandchild” means a child of an employee's child.
   Grandparent. The term “grandparent” means a parent of an employee's parent.
   Health care provider. The term “health care provider” means any person licensed under federal or New York state law to provide medical or emergency services, including, but not limited to, doctors, nurses, emergency room personnel and social workers.
   Hourly professional employee. The term “hourly professional employee” means any individual (i) who is professionally licensed by the New York state education department, office of professions, under the direction of the New York state board of regents under education law sections 6732, 7902 or 8202, (ii) who calls in for work assignments at will determining his or her own work schedule with the ability to reject or accept any assignment referred to them and (iii) who is paid an average hourly wage which is at least four times the federal minimum wage for hours worked during the calendar year.
   Human trafficking. The term “human trafficking” means an act or threat of an act that may constitute sex trafficking, as defined in section 230.34 of the penal law, or labor trafficking, as defined in section 135.35 and 135.36 of the penal law.
   Member of the same family or household. The term “member of the same family or household” means (i) persons related by consanguinity or affinity; (ii) persons legally married to or in a domestic partnership with one another; (iii) persons formerly married to or in a domestic partnership with one another regardless of whether they still reside in the same household; (iv) persons who have a child in common, regardless of whether such persons have been married or domestic partners or have lived together at any time; and (v) persons who are not related by consanguinity or affinity and who are or have been in an intimate relationship regardless of whether such persons have lived together at any time.
   Minor Child. The term “minor child” means a child under the age of 18.
   Paid prenatal leave. The term “paid prenatal leave” means paid prenatal personal leave as defined in subdivision 4-a of section 196-b of the labor law.
   Parent. The term “parent” means a biological, foster, step- or adoptive parent, or a legal guardian of an employee to another person or a person who stood in loco parentis when the employee was a minor child.
   Public disaster. The term “public disaster” means an event such as fire, explosion, terrorist attack, severe weather conditions or other catastrophe that is declared a public emergency or disaster by the president of the United States, the governor of the state of New York or the mayor of the city of New York.
   Public health emergency. The term “public health emergency” means a declaration made by the commissioner of health and mental hygiene pursuant to subdivision d of section 3.01 of the New York city health code or by the mayor pursuant to section 24 of the executive law.
   Public service commission. The term “public service commission” means the public service commission established by section 4 of the public service law.
   Safe time. The term “safe time” means time that is provided by an employer to an employee that can be used for the purposes described in subdivision b of section 20-914 of this chapter, whether or not compensation for that time is required pursuant to this chapter.
   Safe/sick time. The term “safe/sick time” means time that is provided by an employer to an employee that can be used for the purposes described in section 20-914 of this chapter, whether or not compensation for that time is required pursuant to this chapter.
   Sexual offense. The term “sexual offense” means an act or threat of an act that may constitute a violation of article 130 of the penal law.
   Sibling. The term “sibling” means an employee's brother or sister, including half-siblings, step-siblings, foster siblings and siblings related through adoption.
   Sick time. The term “sick time” means time that is provided by an employer to an employee that can be used for the purposes described in subdivision a of section 20-914 of this chapter, whether or not compensation for that time is required pursuant to this chapter.
   Spouse. The term “spouse” means a person to whom an employee is legally married under the laws of the state of New York.
   Stalking. The term “stalking” means an act or threat of an act that may constitute a violation of section 120.45, 120.50, 120.55, or 120.60 of the penal law.
   Workplace violence. The term “workplace violence” means any act or threat of violence against an employee that occurs in a place of employment.
(Am. L.L. 2015/104, 11/30/2015, eff. 3/29/2016; Am. L.L. 2017/199, 11/6/2017, eff. 5/5/2018; Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020; Am. L.L. 2020/097, 9/28/2020, eff. 9/30/2020; Am. L.L. 2021/172, 12/24/2021, retro. eff. 11/2/2021; Am. L.L. 2025/145, 10/25/2025, eff. 2/22/2026)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2013/046, L.L. 2014/007, L.L. 2015/104, L.L. 2020/080, and L.L. 2021/172.
§ 20-913 Right to safe/sick time; accrual.
   a.   All employees have the right to safe/sick time pursuant to this chapter.
      1.   All employers that employ 5 or more employees, all employers of 1 or more domestic workers, and any employer of 4 or fewer employees that had a net income of 1 million dollars or more during the previous tax year, shall provide paid safe/sick time to their employees in accordance with subdivision b of this section. An employer shall pay an employee for paid safe/sick time at the employee's regular rate of pay at the time the paid safe/sick time is taken, provided that the rate of pay shall not be less than the highest applicable rate of pay to which the employee would be entitled pursuant to subdivision 1 of section 652 of the labor law, or any other applicable federal, state, or local law, rule, contract, or agreement. Such rate of pay shall be calculated without allowing for any tip credit or tip allowance set forth in any federal, state, or local law, rule, contract, or agreement.
      2.   All employees not entitled to paid safe/sick time pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision shall be entitled to unpaid safe/sick time in accordance with subdivision b of this section.
   b.   All employers shall provide a minimum of 1 hour of safe/sick time for every 30 hours worked by an employee, provided that employers with 99 or fewer employees shall not be required under this chapter to provide more than a total of 40 hours of accrued safe/sick time for an employee in a calendar year and further provided that employers with 100 or more employees shall not be required under this chapter to provide more than a total of 56 hours of accrued safe/sick time for an employee in a calendar year. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to discourage or prohibit an employer from allowing the accrual of safe/sick time at a faster rate or the use of safe/sick time at an earlier date than this chapter requires.
   c.   An employer required to provide paid safe/sick time pursuant to this chapter who provides an employee with an amount of paid leave, including paid time off, paid vacation, paid personal days or paid days of rest required to be compensated pursuant to subdivision 1 of section 161 of the labor law, sufficient to meet the requirements of subdivision b of this section and who allows such paid leave to be used for the same purposes and under the same conditions as safe/sick time required pursuant to this chapter, is not required to provide additional paid safe/sick time for such employee whether or not such employee chooses to use such leave for the purposes included in section 20-914 of this chapter. An employer required to provide unpaid safe/sick time pursuant to this chapter who provides an employee with an amount of unpaid or paid leave, including unpaid or paid time off, unpaid or paid vacation, or unpaid or paid personal days, sufficient to meet the requirements of this section and who allows such leave to be used for the same purposes and under the same conditions as safe/sick time required pursuant to this chapter, is not required to provide additional unpaid safe/sick time for such employee whether or not such employee chooses to use such leave for the purposes set forth in section 20-914 of this chapter.
   d.   Safe/sick time as provided pursuant to subdivision b of this section shall begin to accrue at the commencement of employment or on the effective date of the local law that created the right to such time, whichever is later. An employee shall be entitled to use such safe/sick time as it is accrued, except that employees of any employer of 4 or fewer employees that had a net income of 1 million dollars or more during the previous tax year may use paid safe/sick time as it is accrued on or after January 1, 2021, and that employees of any employer of 100 or more employees may use any accrued amount of paid safe/sick time that exceeds 40 hours per calendar year on or after January 1, 2021.
   e.   Employees who are exempt from the overtime requirements of New York state law or regulations, including the wage orders promulgated by the New York commissioner of labor pursuant to article 19 or 19-A of the labor law, shall be assumed to work 40 hours in each work week for purposes of safe/sick time accrual unless their regular work week is less than 40 hours, in which case safe/sick time accrues based upon that regular work week.
   f.   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to (i) work study programs under 42 U.S.C. section 2753, (ii) employees for the hours worked and compensated by or through qualified scholarships as defined in 26 U.S.C. section 117, (iii) independent contractors who do not meet the definition of employee under subdivision 2 of section 190 of the labor law, and (iv) hourly professional employees.
   g.   Employees shall determine how much safe/sick time they need to use, provided that employers may set a reasonable minimum increment for the use of safe/sick time, which shall not exceed 4 hours per day for the use of safe/sick time provided pursuant to subdivisions b or k of section 20-913 or one hour per day for the use of paid prenatal leave.
   h.   For employees of employers with 99 or fewer employees, up to 40 hours of unused accrued safe/sick time as provided pursuant to subdivision b of this section shall be carried over to the following calendar year, and for employees of employers with 100 or more employees, up to 56 hours of unused accrued safe/sick time as provided pursuant to subdivision b of this section shall be carried over to the following calendar year; provided that no employer with 99 or fewer employees shall be required to (i) allow the use of more than 40 accrued hours of safe/sick time in a calendar year or (ii) carry over unused paid safe/sick time if the employee is paid for any unused safe/sick time at the end of the calendar year in which such time is accrued and the employer provides the employee with an amount of paid safe/sick time that meets or exceeds the requirements of this chapter for such employee for the immediately subsequent calendar year on the first day of such year; and further provided that no employer with 100 or more employees shall be required to (i) allow the use of more than 56 accrued hours of safe/sick time in a calendar year or (ii) carry over unused paid safe/sick time if the employee is paid for any unused safe/sick time at the end of the calendar year in which such time is accrued and the employer provides the employee with an amount of paid safe/sick time that meets or exceeds the requirements of this chapter for such employee for the immediately subsequent calendar year on the first day of such year.
   i.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring financial or other reimbursement to an employee from an employer upon the employee's termination, resignation, retirement, or other separation from employment for safe/sick time that has not been used.
   j.   If an employee is transferred to a separate division, entity or location in the city, but remains employed by the same employer, such employee is entitled to all safe/sick time accrued at the prior division, entity or location and is entitled to retain or use all safe/sick time as provided pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. When there is a separation from employment and the employee is rehired within 6 months of separation by the same employer, previously accrued safe/sick time that was not used shall be reinstated and such employee shall be entitled to use such accrued safe/sick time at any time after such employee is rehired, provided that no employer shall be required to reinstate such safe/sick time to the extent the employee was paid for unused accrued safe/sick time prior to separation and the employee agreed to accept such pay for such unused safe/sick time.
   k.   In addition to the safe/sick time required to be provided pursuant to subdivision b of this section, an employer shall provide an employee upon hire and on the first day of each calendar year with a minimum of 32 hours of unpaid safe/sick time that is immediately available for use. An employer shall not be required to carry over to the following calendar year any unused unpaid safe/sick time provided pursuant to this subdivision. If an employee communicates to the employer that the employee needs time off for a purpose described in section 20-914 of this chapter, an employer must provide safe/sick time provided pursuant to subdivision b of this section unless such safe/sick time pursuant to subdivision b is unavailable or the employee specifically requests to use other leave in lieu of safe/sick time pursuant to subdivision b.
   l.   In addition to the safe/sick time required to be provided pursuant to subdivisions b and k of this section, an employer shall provide employees 20 hours of paid prenatal leave during any 52-week calendar period in accordance with the rules of the department.
(Am. L.L. 2017/199, 11/6/2017, eff. 5/5/2018; Am. L.L. 2020/097, 9/28/2020, eff. 9/30/2020; Am. L.L. 2025/145, 10/25/2025, eff. 2/22/2026)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2013/046 and L.L. 2014/007.
§ 20-914 Use of safe/sick time.
   a.   Sick time. 
      1.   An employee shall be entitled to use sick time for absence from work due to:
         (a)   such employee's mental or physical illness, injury or health condition or need for medical diagnosis, care or treatment of a mental or physical illness, injury or health condition or need for preventive medical care; or
         (b)   care of a family member who needs medical diagnosis, care or treatment of a mental or physical illness, injury or health condition or who needs preventive medical care; or
         (c)   closure of such employee’s place of business by order of a public official due to a public health emergency, a public disaster, or such employee’s need to care for a child whose school or childcare provider closed or restricted in-person operations by order of public official due to a public health emergency or public disaster; or
         (d)   direction by a public official to remain indoors or avoid travel during a public disaster which prevents such employee from reporting to their work location.
      2.   For an absence of more than 3 consecutive work days for sick time, an employer may require reasonable documentation that the use of sick time was authorized by this subdivision. For sick time used pursuant to this subdivision, documentation signed by a licensed health care provider indicating the need for the amount of sick time taken shall be considered reasonable documentation and an employer shall not require that such documentation specify the nature of the employee's or the employee's family member's injury, illness or condition, except as required by law. Where a health care provider charges an employee a fee for the provision of documentation requested by their employer, such employer shall reimburse the employee for such fee.
   b.   Safe time. 
      1.   An employee shall be entitled to use safe time for absence from work due to any of the following reasons:
         (a)   when the employee or employee’s family member has been the victim of domestic violence pursuant to subdivision 34 of section 292 of the executive law, a family offense matter, sexual offense, stalking, workplace violence, or human trafficking:
            (1)   to obtain services from a domestic violence shelter, rape crisis center, or other shelter or services program for relief from a family offense matter, sexual offense, stalking, or human trafficking;
            (2)   to participate in safety planning, temporarily or permanently relocate, or take other actions to increase the safety of the employee or employee’s family members from future family offense matters, sexual offenses, stalking, or human trafficking;
            (3)   to meet with a legal or social service provider to obtain information and advice on, and prepare for or participate in any criminal or civil proceeding, including but not limited to, matters related to a family offense matter, sexual offense, stalking, human trafficking, custody, visitation, matrimonial issues, orders of protection, immigration, housing or discrimination;
            (4)   to file a complaint or domestic incident report with law enforcement;
            (5)   to meet with a district attorney’s office;
            (6)   to enroll children in a new school; or
            (7)   to take other actions necessary to maintain, improve, or restore the physical, psychological, or economic health or safety of the employee or the employee’s family member or to protect those who associate or work with the employee.
         (b)   When the employee is a caregiver for a minor child or care recipient, to provide care to the minor child or care recipient; or
         (c)   to initiate, attend or prepare for a legal proceeding or hearing related to subsistence benefits or housing to which the employee, the employee’s family member, or the employee’s care recipient is a party, or to take actions necessary to apply for, maintain, or restore subsistence benefits or shelter for the employee or their family member or care recipient.
      2.   For an absence of more than 3 consecutive work days for safe time, an employer may require reasonable documentation that the use of safe time was authorized by this subdivision. For safe time used pursuant to this subdivision, documentation signed by an employee, agent, or volunteer of a legal or social services provider, court or government agency, school or care provider, an attorney, a member of the clergy, or a medical or other professional service provider; a police, agency or court record; or a notarized letter from the employee explaining the need for such time shall be considered reasonable documentation and an employer shall not require that such documentation specify the details of the underlying need for the safe time. An employer shall reimburse an employee for all reasonable costs or expenses incurred for the purpose of obtaining such documentation for an employer.
   c.   An employer may require reasonable notice of the need to use safe/sick time. Where such need is foreseeable, an employer may require reasonable advance notice of the intention to use such safe/sick time, not to exceed 7 days prior to the date such safe/sick time is to begin. Where such need is not foreseeable, an employer may require an employee to provide notice of the need for the use of safe/sick time as soon as practicable.
   d.   Nothing herein shall prevent an employer from requiring an employee to provide written confirmation that an employee used safe/sick time pursuant to this section.
   e.   An employer shall not require an employee, as a condition of taking safe/sick time, to search for or find a replacement worker to cover the hours during which such employee is utilizing time.
   f.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit an employer from taking disciplinary action, up to and including termination, against a worker who uses safe/sick time provided pursuant to this chapter for purposes other than those described in this section.
(Am. L.L. 2017/199, 11/6/2017, eff. 5/5/2018; Am. L.L. 2020/097, 9/28/2020, eff. 9/30/2020; Am. L.L. 2021/172, 12/24/2021, retro. eff. 11/2/2021; Am. L.L. 2025/145, 10/25/2025, eff. 2/22/2026)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2013/046 and L.L. 2021/172.
§ 20-914.1 COVID-19 child vaccination time. [Repealed]
(L.L. 2021/172, 12/24/2021, retro. eff. 11/2/2021)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2021/172.
§ 20-915 Changing schedule.
   a.   Upon mutual consent of the employee and the employer, an employee who is absent for a reason listed in subdivision a or b of section 20-914 of this chapter may work additional hours during the immediately preceding 7 days if the absence was foreseeable or within the immediately subsequent 7 days from that absence without using safe/sick time to make up for the original hours for which such employee was absent, provided that an adjunct professor who is an employee at an institute of higher education may work such additional hours at any time during the academic term.
   b.   An employer shall not require an employee to work additional hours to make up for the hours for which such employee uses safe/sick time or to search for or find a replacement employee to cover the hours during which the employee uses safe/sick time.
   c.   If an employee works additional hours upon mutual consent of the employee and employer, and such hours are fewer than the number of hours such employee was originally scheduled to work, then such employee shall be able to use any available safe/sick time for the difference. Should the employee work additional hours, the employer shall comply with any applicable federal, state or local labor laws.
(Am. L.L. 2017/199, 11/6/2017, eff. 5/5/2018; Am. L.L. 2025/145, 10/25/2025, eff. 2/22/2026)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2013/046.
§ 20-916 Collective bargaining agreements.
   a.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any employee covered by a valid collective bargaining agreement if (i) such provisions are expressly waived in such collective bargaining agreement and (ii) such agreement provides for superior or comparable benefits for the employees covered by such agreement in the form of paid or unpaid time off; such time off shall be in the form of leave, compensation, other employee benefits, or some combination thereof. Comparable benefits shall include, but are not limited to, vacation time, personal time, and holiday and Sunday time pay at premium rates, provided however that unpaid time off shall not be considered a comparable benefit for purposes of paid safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave under section 20-913.
   b.   Notwithstanding subdivision a of this section, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any employee in the construction or grocery industry covered by a valid collective bargaining agreement if such provisions are expressly waived in such collective bargaining agreement.
(Am. L.L. 2017/199, 11/6/2017, eff. 5/5/2018; Am. L.L. 2021/172, 12/24/2021, retro. eff. 11/2/2021; Am. L.L. 2025/145, 10/25/2025, eff. 2/22/2026)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2013/046 and L.L. 2021/172.
§ 20-917 Public disasters.
In the event of a public disaster, the mayor may, for the length of such disaster, suspend the provisions of this chapter for businesses, corporations or other entities regulated by the public service commission.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2013/046.
§ 20-918 Retaliation and interference prohibited.
   a.   No person shall interfere with any investigation, proceeding or hearing pursuant to this chapter.
   b.   No person shall take any adverse action against an employee that penalizes an employee for, or is reasonably likely to deter an employee from, exercising or attempting to exercise rights under this chapter or interfere with an employee's exercise of rights under this chapter and implementing rules.
   c.   Adverse actions include, but are not limited to, threats, intimidation, discipline, discharge, demotion, suspension, harassment, discrimination, reduction in hours or pay, informing another employer of an employee's exercise of rights under this chapter, blacklisting, and maintenance or application of an absence control policy that counts protected leave for safe/sick time as an absence that may lead to or result in an adverse action. Adverse actions include actions related to perceived immigration status or work authorization.
   d.   An employee need not explicitly refer to a provision of this chapter or implementing rules to be protected from an adverse action.
   e.   The protections of this section shall apply to any person who mistakenly but in good faith asserts their rights or alleges a violation of this chapter.
   f.   A causal connection between the exercise, attempted exercise, or anticipated exercise of rights protected by this chapter and implementing rules and an employer's adverse action against an employee or a group of employees may be established by indirect or direct evidence.
   g.   For purposes of subdivision b of this section, a violation is established when it is shown that a protected activity was a motivating factor for an adverse action, whether or not other factors motivated the adverse action.
(Am. L.L. 2020/097, 9/28/2020, eff. 9/30/2020; Am. L.L. 2021/172, 12/24/2021, retro. eff. 11/2/2021)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2013/046 and L.L. 2021/172.
§ 20-919 Notice of rights.
   a.   1.   An employer shall provide an employee with written notice of such employee's right to safe/sick time pursuant to this chapter, including the calendar year of the employer, the right to be free from retaliation and to file a complaint with the department, and any other information the commissioner deems appropriate. Such notice shall be in English and the primary language spoken by that employee, provided that the department has made available a translation of such notice in such language pursuant to subdivision b of this section. Such notice shall also be conspicuously posted at an employer's place of business in an area accessible to employees.
      2.   Such notice shall be provided to each employee at the commencement of employment. For employees who were already employed prior to the effective dates of provisions of this chapter establishing their right to safe/sick time, such notice shall be provided within thirty days of the effective date of the local law that established each such right.
   b.   The department shall create and make available notices that contain the information required pursuant to subdivision a of this section concerning safe/sick time and such notices shall allow for the employer to fill in applicable dates for such employer's calendar year. Such notices shall be posted in a downloadable format on the department's website in Chinese, English, French-Creole, Italian, Korean, Russian, Spanish and any other language deemed appropriate by the department.
   c.   The amount of safe/sick time accrued and used during a pay period and of safe/sick time available for use pursuant to subdivisions b and k of section 20-913 shall be noted on a pay statement or other form of written documentation provided to the employee each pay period.
   d.   Any person or entity that willfully violates the notice requirements of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $50 for each employee who was not given appropriate notice pursuant to this section.
(Am. L.L. 2017/199, 11/6/2017, eff. 5/5/2018; Am. L.L. 2020/097, 9/28/2020, eff. 9/30/2020; Am. L.L. 2025/145, 10/25/2025, eff. 2/22/2026)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2013/046 and L.L. 2014/007.
§ 20-919.1 Public education campaign.
   a.   The commissioner shall engage in ongoing public education efforts to inform employers, employment agencies, employees and job applicants about their rights and responsibilities under this chapter, and shall make best efforts to:
      1.   In coordination with the department of health and mental hygiene, distribute posters, flyers, and other written materials concerning employees’ rights pursuant to this chapter to pharmacies, doctors’ offices, and hospitals and such other sites as may be appropriate; and
      2.   Invite the New York city health and hospitals corporation to participate in the posting and dissemination of posters, flyers and written materials concerning employees’ rights pursuant to this chapter.
   b.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the acceptance or display of such materials by private entities.
(L.L. 2023/143, 11/5/2023, eff. 3/4/2024)
§ 20-920 Employer records.
Employers shall make and retain records documenting such employer's compliance with the requirements of this chapter for a period of three years unless otherwise required pursuant to any other law, rule or regulation, and shall allow the department to access such records, with appropriate notice and at a mutually agreeable time of day, in furtherance of an investigation conducted pursuant to this chapter.
(Am. L.L. 2020/097, 9/28/2020, eff. 9/30/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2013/046 and L.L. 2014/007.
§ 20-921 Confidentiality and nondisclosure.
   a.   An employer may not require the disclosure of details relating to the underlying reason for using safe/sick time as a condition of providing safe/sick time under this chapter. Health information about an employee, or an employee's family member or care recipient, and information concerning the personal situation that led the employee to use safe time obtained solely for the purposes of utilizing safe/sick time pursuant to this chapter, shall be treated as confidential and shall not be disclosed except by the affected employee, with the written permission of the affected employee or as required by law. Provided, however, that nothing in this section shall preclude an employer from considering information provided in connection with a request for safe/sick time in connection with a request for reasonable accommodation pursuant to subdivision 22 or 27 of section 8-107.
(Am. L.L. 2017/199, 11/6/2017, eff. 5/5/2018; Am. L.L. 2018/063, 1/19/2018, eff. 10/16/2018; Am. L.L. 2020/097, 9/28/2020, eff. 9/30/2020; Am. L.L. 2025/145, 10/25/2025, eff. 2/22/2026)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2013/046.
§ 20-922 Encouragement of more generous policies; no effect on more generous policies.
   a.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to discourage or prohibit the adoption or retention of a safe time or sick time policy more generous than that which is required herein.
   b.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as diminishing the obligation of an employer to comply with any contract, collective bargaining agreement, employment benefit plan or other agreement providing more generous safe time or sick time to an employee than required herein.
   c.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as diminishing the rights of public employees regarding safe time or sick time as provided pursuant to federal, state or city law.
(Am. L.L. 2017/199, 11/6/2017, eff. 5/5/2018; Am. L.L. 2021/172, 12/24/2021, retro. eff. 11/2/2021)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2013/046 and L.L. 2021/172.
§ 20-923 Other legal requirements.
   a.   This chapter provides minimum requirements pertaining to safe time and sick time and shall not be construed to preempt, limit or otherwise affect the applicability of any other law, regulation, rule, requirement, policy or standard that provides for greater accrual or use by employees of safe time or sick time, whether paid or unpaid, or that extends other protections to employees.
   b.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as creating or imposing any requirement in conflict with any federal or state law, rule or regulation, nor shall anything in this chapter be construed to diminish or impair the rights of an employee or employer under any valid collective bargaining agreement.
   c.   Where section 196-b of the labor law, or any regulation issued thereunder, sets forth a standard or requirement for minimum hour or use of safe/sick time that exceeds any provision in this chapter, such standard or requirement shall be incorporated by reference and shall be enforceable by the department in the manner set forth in this chapter and subject to the penalties and remedies set forth in the labor law.
(Am. L.L. 2017/199, 11/6/2017, eff. 5/5/2018; Am. L.L. 2020/097, 9/28/2020, eff. 9/30/2020; Am. L.L. 2021/172, 12/24/2021, retro. eff. 11/2/2021)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2013/046 and L.L. 2021/172.
§ 20-924 Enforcement and penalties.
   a.   The department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. In effectuating such enforcement, the department shall establish a system utilizing multiple means of communication to receive complaints regarding non-compliance with this chapter and investigate complaints received by the department in a timely manner. The department may open an investigation upon receipt of a complaint or on its own initiative.
   b.   Any person alleging a violation of this chapter shall have the right to file a complaint with the department within 2 years of the date the person knew or should have known of the alleged violation. The department shall maintain confidential the identity of any natural person providing information relevant to enforcement of this chapter unless disclosure of such person's identity is necessary to the department for resolution of its investigation or otherwise required by federal or state law. The department shall, to the extent practicable, notify such person that the department will be disclosing such person’s identity prior to such disclosure.
   c.   1.   Upon receiving a complaint alleging a violation of this chapter, the department shall investigate such complaint, provided that if the complainant commences a civil action pursuant to subdivision f of this section for the same alleged violation, the department shall stay such investigation until the department is notified such civil action is withdrawn or dismissed without prejudice. Upon notice of a final judgment or settlement in such a civil action, the department shall dismiss the complaint unless the department determines the complaint alleges a violation not resolved by such judgment or settlement. The complainant must notify the department, in a manner prescribed by the commissioner and described on the department’s website, within 30 days of the date that the time for any appeal has lapsed that such complaint is withdrawn, dismissed without prejudice, or resolved by final judgment or settlement. Nothing in this paragraph shall affect the authority of the department to open an investigation on its own initiative pursuant to subdivision a of this section.
      2.   Within 14 days of written notification of an investigation by the department, the person or entity under investigation shall provide the department with a written response and such other information as the department may request. The department shall keep complainants reasonably notified regarding the status of their complaint and any resultant investigation. If, as a result of an investigation of a complaint or an investigation conducted upon its own initiative, the department believes that a violation has occurred, it shall issue to the offending person or entity a notice of violation. The commissioner shall prescribe the form and wording of such notices of violation. The notice of violation shall be returnable to the administrative tribunal authorized to adjudicate violations of this chapter.
   d.   The department shall have the power to impose penalties provided for in this chapter and to grant each and every employee or former employee all appropriate relief. Such relief shall include: (i) for each instance of safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave taken by an employee but unlawfully not compensated by the employer: 3 times the wages that should have been paid under this chapter or $250, whichever is greater; (ii) for each instance of safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave requested by an employee but unlawfully denied by the employer and not taken by the employee or unlawfully conditioned upon searching for or finding a replacement worker, or for each instance an employer requires an employee to work additional hours without the mutual consent of such employer and employee in violation of section 20-915 of this chapter: $500; (iii) for each violation of section 20-918 not including discharge from employment: full compensation including wages and benefits lost, $500 and equitable relief as appropriate; (iv) for each instance of unlawful discharge from employment: full compensation including wages and benefits lost, $2,500 and equitable relief, including reinstatement, as appropriate; and (v) for each employee covered by an employer's official or unofficial policy or practice of not providing or refusing to allow the use of safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave in violation of section 20-913, $500.
   e.   Any entity or person found to be in violation of the provisions of sections 20-913, 20-914, 20-915 or 20-918 of this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty payable to the city not to exceed $500 for the first violation and, for subsequent violations that occur within 2 years of any previous violation, not to exceed $750 for the second violation and not to exceed $1,000 for each succeeding violation. Penalties shall be imposed on a per employee and per instance basis.
   f.   Any person alleging a violation of this chapter may commence a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to seek compensatory damages, including, but not limited to, the relief set forth in subdivision d of this section, injunctive and declaratory relief, attorney’s fees and costs, and such other relief as such court deems appropriate. Such civil action shall be commenced within 2 years of the date the person knew or should have known of the alleged violation.
   g.   Filing a complaint with the department in accordance with subdivision b of this section shall be neither a prerequisite nor a bar to bringing a civil action pursuant to subdivision f of this section.
   h.   The department shall annually report on its website: the number and nature of the complaints filed pursuant to this chapter, including the number of such complaints not substantiated and the number of notices of violations issued; the number of civil actions, to the extent the department is notified of such civil actions pursuant to this chapter; the number of investigations opened and closed pursuant to this chapter; and the average time for a complaint to be resolved pursuant to this chapter.
(Am. L.L. 2020/097, 9/28/2020, eff. 9/30/2020; Am. L.L. 2021/172, 12/24/2021, retro. eff. 11/2/2021; Am. L.L. 2024/022, 1/20/2024, eff. 3/20/2024; Am. L.L. 2025/145, 10/25/2025, eff. 2/22/2026)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2013/046, L.L. 2014/007, and L.L. 2021/172.
§ 20-924.1 Enforcement by the corporation counsel.
The corporation counsel or such other persons designated by the corporation counsel on behalf of the department may initiate in any court of competent jurisdiction any action or proceeding that may be appropriate or necessary for the enforcement of any order issued by the department pursuant to this chapter or for the correction of any violation issued pursuant to section 20-924, including actions to mandate compliance with the provisions of such order, secure permanent injunctions, enjoining any acts or practices that constitute such violation, mandating compliance with the provisions of this chapter or such other relief as may be appropriate.
(L.L. 2020/097, 9/28/2020, eff. 9/30/2020)
§ 20-924.2 Civil action by corporation counsel for pattern or practice of violations.
   a.   Cause of action. 
      1.   Where reasonable cause exists to believe that an employer is engaged in a pattern or practice of violations of this chapter, the corporation counsel or such other persons designated by the corporation counsel may commence a civil action on behalf of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction.
      2.   The corporation counsel or such other persons designated by the corporation counsel shall commence such action by filing a complaint setting forth facts relating to such pattern or practice and requesting relief, which may include injunctive relief, civil penalties and any other appropriate relief.
      3.   Nothing in this section prohibits the department from exercising its authority under section 20-924 or the city charter, provided that a civil action pursuant to this section shall not have previously been commenced.
   b.   Investigation. The corporation counsel may initiate any investigation to ascertain such facts as may be necessary for the commencement of a civil action pursuant to subdivision a of this section, and in connection therewith shall have the power to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents, to administer oaths and to examine such persons as are deemed necessary.
   c.   Civil penalties and relief for employees. In any civil action commenced pursuant to subdivision a of this section, the trier of fact may impose a civil penalty of not more than $15,000 for a finding that an employer has engaged in a pattern or practice of violations of this chapter. Any civil penalty so recovered shall be paid into the general fund of the city. The trier of fact may, in addition, award relief of up to $500 to each employee covered by an employer's official or unofficial policy or practice of not providing or refusing to allow the use of earned time in violation of section 20-913.
(L.L. 2020/097, 9/28/2020, eff. 9/30/2020)
§ 20-925 Designation of agency. [Repealed]
(Repealed L.L. 2015/104, 11/30/2015, eff. 3/29/2016)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2014/007 and L.L. 2015/104.

SECTION 191
Frequency of payments
Labor (LAB) CHAPTER 31, ARTICLE 6
§ 191. Frequency of payments. 1. Every employer shall pay wages in
accordance with the following provisions:

a. Manual worker.--- (i) A manual worker shall be paid weekly and not
later than seven calendar days after the end of the week in which the
wages are earned; provided however that a manual worker employed by an
employer authorized by the commissioner pursuant to subparagraph (ii) of
this paragraph or by a non-profitmaking organization shall be paid in
accordance with the agreed terms of employment, but not less frequently
than semi-monthly.

(ii) The commissioner may authorize an employer which has in the three
years preceding the application employed an average of one thousand or
more persons in this state or has for one year preceding the application
employed an average of one thousand or more persons in this state and
has for three years preceding the application employed an average of
three thousand or more persons outside the state to pay less frequently
than weekly but not less frequently than semi-monthly if the employer
furnishes satisfactory proof to the commissioner of its continuing
ability to meet its payroll responsibilities. In making this
determination the commissioner shall consider the following: (A) the
employer's history meeting its payroll responsibilities in New York
state or if no such history in New York state is available, other
financial information, as requested by the commissioner, which will
assist the commissioner in determining the likelihood of the employer's
continuing ability to meet payroll responsibilities; (B) proof of the
employer's coverage for workers' compensation and disability; (C) proof
that there are no outstanding warrants of the department of taxation and
finance or the department of labor against the employer for failure to
remit state personal income tax withholdings or unemployment insurance
contributions; and (D) proof that the employer has a computerized record
keeping system for payroll which, at a minimum, specifies hours worked,
rate of pay, gross wages, deductions and date of pay for each employee.
If the employers' manual workers are represented by a labor
organization, the commissioner shall not grant an employer's application
for authorization under this subparagraph unless that labor organization
consents thereto.

Upon notice to the employer and an opportunity to be heard, the
commissioner may rescind such authorization whenever the commissioner
has determined, based upon the factors enumerated above, that the
employer is no longer able to meet its payroll responsibilities as
previously authorized.

b. Railroad worker.--- A railroad worker shall be paid on or before
Thursday of each week the wages earned during the seven-day period
ending on Tuesday of the preceding week; and provided further that at
the written request and notification of address by any employee, every
railroad corporation, with the exception of those commuter railroads
under the jurisdiction of the metropolitan transportation authority,
shall mail every check for wages of such employee via the United States
postal service, first class mail.

c. Commission salespersons.--A commission salesperson shall be paid
the wages, salary, drawing account, commissions and all other monies
earned or payable in accordance with the agreed terms of employment, but
not less frequently than once in each month and not later than the last
day of the month following the month in which they are earned; provided,
however, that if monthly or more frequent payment of wages, salary,
drawing accounts or commissions are substantial, then additional
compensation earned, including but not limited to extra or incentive
earnings, bonuses and special payments, may be paid less frequently than
once in each month, but in no event later than the time provided in the
employment agreement or compensation plan. The employer shall furnish a
commission salesperson, upon written request, a statement of earnings
paid or due and unpaid. The agreed terms of employment shall be reduced
to writing, signed by both the employer and the commission salesperson,
kept on file by the employer for a period not less than three years and
made available to the commissioner upon request. Such writing shall
include a description of how wages, salary, drawing account, commissions
and all other monies earned and payable shall be calculated. Where the
writing provides for a recoverable draw, the frequency of reconciliation
shall be included. Such writing shall also provide details pertinent to
payment of wages, salary, drawing account, commissions and all other
monies earned and payable in the case of termination of employment by
either party. The failure of an employer to produce such written terms
of employment, upon request of the commissioner, shall give rise to a
presumption that the terms of employment that the commissioned
salesperson has presented are the agreed terms of employment.

d. Clerical and other worker.--- A clerical and other worker shall be
paid the wages earned in accordance with the agreed terms of employment,
but not less frequently than semi-monthly, on regular pay days
designated in advance by the employer.

2. No employee shall be required as a condition of employment to
accept wages at periods other than as provided in this section.

3. If employment is terminated, the employer shall pay the wages not
later than the regular pay day for the pay period during which the
termination occurred, as established in accordance with the provisions
of this section. If requested by the employee, such wages shall be paid
by mail.


SECTION 193
Deductions from wages
Labor (LAB) CHAPTER 31, ARTICLE 6
§ 193. Deductions from wages. * 1. No employer shall make any
deduction from the wages of an employee, except deductions which:

a. are made in accordance with the provisions of any law or any rule
or regulation issued by any governmental agency including regulations
promulgated under paragraph c and paragraph d of this subdivision; or

b. are expressly authorized in writing by the employee and are for the
benefit of the employee, provided that such authorization is voluntary
and only given following receipt by the employee of written notice of
all terms and conditions of the payment and/or its benefits and the
details of the manner in which deductions will be made. Whenever there
is a substantial change in the terms or conditions of the payment,
including but not limited to, any change in the amount of the deduction,
or a substantial change in the benefits of the deduction or the details
in the manner in which deductions shall be made, the employer shall, as
soon as practicable, but in each case before any increased deduction is
made on the employee's behalf, notify the employee prior to the
implementation of the change. Such authorization shall be kept on file
on the employer's premises for the period during which the employee is
employed by the employer and for six years after such employment ends.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, employee authorization for deductions
under this section may also be provided to the employer pursuant to the
terms of a collective bargaining agreement. Such authorized deductions
shall be limited to payments for:

(i) insurance premiums and prepaid legal plans;

(ii) pension or health and welfare benefits;

(iii) contributions to a bona fide charitable organization;

(iv) purchases made at events sponsored by a bona fide charitable
organization affiliated with the employer where at least twenty percent
of the profits from such event are being contributed to a bona fide
charitable organization;

(v) United States bonds;

(vi) dues or assessments to a labor organization;

(vii) discounted parking or discounted passes, tokens, fare cards,
vouchers, or other items that entitle the employee to use mass transit;

(viii) fitness center, health club, and/or gym membership dues;

(ix) cafeteria and vending machine purchases made at the employer's
place of business and purchases made at gift shops operated by the
employer, where the employer is a hospital, college, or university;

(x) pharmacy purchases made at the employer's place of business;

(xi) tuition, room, board, and fees for pre-school, nursery, primary,
secondary, and/or post-secondary educational institutions;

(xii) day care, before-school and after-school care expenses;

(xiii) payments for housing provided at no more than market rates by
non-profit hospitals or affiliates thereof; and

(xiv) similar payments for the benefit of the employee.

c. are related to recovery of an overpayment of wages where such
overpayment is due to a mathematical or other clerical error by the
employer. In making such recoveries, the employer shall comply with
regulations promulgated by the commissioner for this purpose, which
regulations shall include, but not be limited to, provisions governing:
the size of overpayments that may be covered by this section; the
timing, frequency, duration, and method of such recovery; limitations on
the periodic amount of such recovery; a requirement that notice be
provided to the employee prior to the commencement of such recovery; a
requirement that the employer implement a procedure for disputing the
amount of such overpayment or seeking to delay commencement of such
recovery; the terms and content of such a procedure and a requirement
that notice of the procedure for disputing the overpayment or seeking to
delay commencement of such recovery be provided to the employee prior to
the commencement of such recovery.

d. repayment of advances of salary or wages made by the employer to
the employee. Deductions to cover such repayments shall be made in
accordance with regulations promulgated by the commissioner for this
purpose, which regulations shall include, but not be limited to,
provisions governing: the timing, frequency, duration, and method of
such repayment; limitations on the periodic amount of such repayment; a
requirement that notice be provided to the employee prior to the
commencement of such repayment; a requirement that the employer
implement a procedure for disputing the amount of such repayment or
seeking to delay commencement of such repayment; the terms and content
of such a procedure and a requirement that notice of the procedure for
disputing the repayment or seeking to delay commencement of such
repayment be provided to the employee at the time the loan is made.

* NB Effective until November 6, 2028

* 1. No employer shall make any deduction from the wages of an
employee, except deductions which:

a. are made in accordance with the provisions of any law or any rule
or regulation issued by any governmental agency; or

b. are expressly authorized in writing by the employee and are for the
benefit of the employee; provided that such authorization is kept on
file on the employer's premises. Such authorized deductions shall be
limited to payments for insurance premiums, pension or health and
welfare benefits, contributions to charitable organizations, payments
for United States bonds, payments for dues or assessments to a labor
organization, and similar payments for the benefit of the employee.

* NB Effective November 6, 2028

* 2. Deductions made in conjunction with an employer sponsored pre-tax
contribution plan approved by the IRS or other local taxing authority,
including those falling within one or more of the categories set forth
in paragraph b of subdivision one of this section, shall be considered
to have been made in accordance with paragraph a of subdivision one of
this section.

* NB Effective until November 6, 2028

* 2. No employer shall make any charge against wages, or require an
employee to make any payment by separate transaction unless such charge
or payment is permitted as a deduction from wages under the provisions
of subdivision one of this section.

* NB Effective November 6, 2028

* 3. a. No employer shall make any charge against wages, or require an
employee to make any payment by separate transaction unless such charge
or payment is permitted as a deduction from wages under the provisions
of subdivision one of this section or is permitted or required under any
provision of a current collective bargaining agreement.

b. Notwithstanding the existence of employee authorization to make
deductions in accordance with subparagraphs (iv), (ix), and (x) of
paragraph b of subdivision one of this section and deductions determined
by the commissioner to be similar to such deductions in accordance with
subparagraph (xiv) of paragraph b of subdivision one of this section,
the total aggregate amount of such deductions for each pay period shall
be subject to the following limitations: (i) such aggregate amount shall
not exceed a maximum aggregate limit established by the employer for
each pay period; (ii) such aggregate amount shall not exceed a maximum
aggregate limit established by the employee, which limit may be for any
amount (in ten dollar increments) up to the maximum amount established
by the employer under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph; (iii) the
employer shall not permit any purchases within these categories of
deduction by the employee that exceed the aggregate limit established by
the employee or, if no limit has been set by the employee, the limit set
by the employer; (iv) the employee shall have access within the
workplace to current account information detailing individual
expenditures within these categories of deduction and a running total of
the amount that will be deducted from the employee's pay during the next
applicable pay period. Information shall be available in printed form or
capable of being printed should the employee wish to obtain a listing.
No employee may be charged any fee, directly or indirectly, for access
to, or printing of, such account information.

c. With the exception of wage deductions required or authorized in a
current existing collective bargaining agreement, an employee's
authorization for any and all wage deductions may be revoked in writing
at any time. The employer must cease the wage deduction for which the
employee has revoked authorization as soon as practicable, and, in no
event more than four pay periods or eight weeks after the authorization
has been withdrawn, whichever is sooner.

* NB Effective until November 6, 2028

* 3. Nothing in this section shall justify noncompliance with article
three-A of the personal property law relating to assignment of earnings,
nor with any other law applicable to deductions from wages.

* NB Effective November 6, 2028

* 4. Nothing in this section shall justify noncompliance with article
three-A of the personal property law relating to assignment of earnings,
with section two hundred twenty-one of this chapter relating to company
stores or with any other law applicable to deductions from wages.

* NB Effective until November 6, 2028

5. There is no exception to liability under this section for the
unauthorized failure to pay wages, benefits or wage supplements.


SECTION 195
Notice and record-keeping requirements
Labor (LAB) CHAPTER 31, ARTICLE 6
§ 195. Notice and record-keeping requirements. Every employer shall:

1. (a) provide his or her employees, in writing in English and in the
language identified by each employee as the primary language of such
employee, at the time of hiring, a notice containing the following
information: the rate or rates of pay and basis thereof, whether paid by
the hour, shift, day, week, salary, piece, commission, or other;
allowances, if any, claimed as part of the minimum wage, including tip,
meal, or lodging allowances; the benefit portion of the minimum rate of
home care aide total compensation as defined in section thirty-six
hundred fourteen-c of the public health law ("home care aide benefits"),
if applicable; prevailing wage supplements, if any, claimed as part of
any prevailing wage or similar requirement pursuant to article eight of
this chapter; the regular pay day designated by the employer in
accordance with section one hundred ninety-one of this article; the name
of the employer; any "doing business as" names used by the employer; the
physical address of the employer's main office or principal place of
business, and a mailing address if different; the telephone number of
the employer; plus such other information as the commissioner deems
material and necessary. Where such prevailing wage supplements are
claimed, or such home care aide benefits are provided, the notice shall
identify, for each type of supplement claimed or each type of home care
aide benefits provided: (i) the hourly rate claimed; (ii) the type of
supplement or type of home care aide benefits, including when
applicable, but not limited to, pension or healthcare; (iii) the names
and addresses of the person or entity providing such supplement or such
home care aide benefits; and (iv) the agreement, if any, requiring or
providing for such supplement or such home care aide benefits, together
with information on how copies of such agreements or summaries thereof
may be obtained by an employee. Each time the employer provides such
notice to an employee, the employer shall obtain from the employee a
signed and dated written acknowledgement, in English and in the primary
language of the employee, of receipt of this notice, which the employer
shall preserve and maintain for six years. Such acknowledgement shall
include an affirmation by the employee that the employee accurately
identified his or her primary language to the employer, and that the
notice provided by the employer to such employee pursuant to this
subdivision was in the language so identified or otherwise complied with
paragraph (c) of this subdivision, and shall conform to any additional
requirements established by the commissioner with regard to content and
form. For all employees who are not exempt from overtime compensation as
established in the commissioner's minimum wage orders or otherwise
provided by New York state law or regulation, the notice must state the
regular hourly rate and overtime rate of pay;

(b) The commissioner shall prepare templates that comply with the
requirements of paragraph (a) of this subdivision. Each such template
shall be dual-language, including English and one additional language.
The commissioner shall determine, in his or her discretion, which
languages to provide in addition to English, based on the size of the
New York state population that speaks each language and any other factor
that the commissioner shall deem relevant. All such templates shall be
made available to employers in such manner as determined by the
commissioner;

(c) When an employee identifies as his or her primary language a
language for which a template is not available from the commissioner,
the employer shall comply with this subdivision by providing that
employee an English-language notice or acknowledgment;

(d) An employer shall not be penalized for errors or omissions in the
non-English portions of any notice provided by the commissioner;

(e) The commissioner shall have discretion to waive or alter
requirements of paragraph (a) of this subdivision for temporary help
firms as defined in section nine hundred sixteen of this chapter.

2. notify his or her employees in writing of any changes to the
information set forth in subdivision one of this section, at least seven
calendar days prior to the time of such changes, unless such changes are
reflected on the wage statement furnished in accordance with subdivision
three of this section;

3. furnish each employee with a statement with every payment of wages,
listing the following: the dates of work covered by that payment of
wages; name of employee; name of employer; address and phone number of
employer; rate or rates of pay and basis thereof, whether paid by the
hour, shift, day, week, salary, piece, commission, or other; gross
wages; deductions; allowances, if any, claimed as part of the minimum
wage; the benefit portion of the minimum rate of home care aide total
compensation as defined in section thirty-six hundred fourteen-c of the
public health law ("home care aide benefits"), if applicable; prevailing
wage supplements, if any, claimed as part of any prevailing wage or
similar requirement pursuant to article eight of this chapter; and net
wages. Where such prevailing wage supplements are claimed, or such home
care aide benefits are provided, the statement shall either: (i)
identify the type of each supplement claimed, or the type of each home
care aide benefits provided, and the hourly rate for each; or (ii) be
accompanied by a copy of the applicable notice required under
subdivisions one and two of this section. For all employees who are not
exempt from overtime compensation as established in the commissioner's
minimum wage orders or otherwise provided by New York state law or
regulation, the statement shall include the regular hourly rate or rates
of pay; the overtime rate or rates of pay; the number of regular hours
worked, and the number of overtime hours worked. For all employees paid
a piece rate, the statement shall include the applicable piece rate or
rates of pay and number of pieces completed at each piece rate. Upon the
request of an employee, an employer shall furnish an explanation in
writing of how such wages were computed;

3-a. in addition, every railroad corporation shall furnish each
employee with a statement with every payment of wages listing accrued
total earnings and taxes to date and further furnish said employee at
the same time with a separate listing of his daily wages and how they
were computed;

4. establish, maintain and preserve for not less than six years
contemporaneous, true, and accurate payroll records showing for each
week worked the hours worked; the rate or rates of pay and basis
thereof, whether paid by the hour, shift, day, week, salary, piece,
commission, or other; gross wages; deductions; allowances, if any,
claimed as part of the minimum wage; amount of sick leave provided to
each employee; the benefit portion of the minimum rate of home care aide
total compensation as defined in section thirty-six hundred fourteen-c
of the public health law ("home care aide benefits"), if applicable;
prevailing wage supplements, if any, claimed as part of any prevailing
wage or similar requirement pursuant to article eight of this chapter;
and net wages for each employee. Where such prevailing wage supplements
are claimed, or such home care aide benefits are provided, the payroll
records shall include copies of all notices required by subdivisions one
and two of this section. For all employees who are not exempt from
overtime compensation as established in the commissioner's minimum wage
orders or otherwise provided by New York state law or regulation, the
payroll records shall include the regular hourly rate or rates of pay,
the overtime rate or rates of pay, the number of regular hours worked,
and the number of overtime hours worked. For all employees paid a piece
rate, the payroll records shall include the applicable piece rate or
rates of pay and number of pieces completed at each piece rate;

5. notify his employees in writing or by publicly posting the
employer's policy on sick leave, vacation, personal leave, holidays and
hours.

6. notify any employee terminated from employment, in writing, of the
exact date of such termination as well as the exact date of cancellation
of employee benefits connected with such termination. In no case shall
notice of such termination be provided more than five working days after
the date of such termination. Failure to notify an employee of
cancellation of accident or health insurance subjects an employer to an
additional penalty pursuant to section two hundred seventeen of this
chapter.


SECTION 215
Penalties and civil action; prohibited retaliation
Labor (LAB) CHAPTER 31, ARTICLE 7
§ 215. Penalties and civil action; prohibited retaliation. 1. (a) No
employer or his or her agent, or the officer or agent of any
corporation, partnership, or limited liability company, or any other
person, shall discharge, threaten, penalize, or in any other manner
discriminate or retaliate against any employee (i) because such employee
has made a complaint to his or her employer, or to the commissioner or
his or her authorized representative, or to the attorney general or any
other person, that the employer has engaged in conduct that the
employee, reasonably and in good faith, believes violates any provision
of this chapter, or any order issued by the commissioner (ii) because
such employer or person believes that such employee has made a complaint
to his or her employer, or to the commissioner or his or her authorized
representative, or to the attorney general, or to any other person that
the employer has violated any provision of this chapter, or any order
issued by the commissioner (iii) because such employee has caused to be
instituted or is about to institute a proceeding under or related to
this chapter, or (iv) because such employee has provided information to
the commissioner or his or her authorized representative or the attorney
general, or (v) because such employee has testified or is about to
testify in an investigation or proceeding under this chapter, or (vi)
because such employee has otherwise exercised rights protected under
this chapter, or (vii) because the employer has received an adverse
determination from the commissioner involving the employee, or (viii)
because such employee has used any legally protected absence pursuant to
federal, local, or state law.

An employee complaint or other communication need not make explicit
reference to any section or provision of this chapter to trigger the
protections of this section.

As used in this section, to threaten, penalize, or in any other manner
discriminate or retaliate against any employee includes; threatening to
contact or contacting United States immigration authorities or otherwise
reporting or threatening to report an employee's suspected citizenship
or immigration status or the suspected citizenship or immigration status
of an employee's family or household member, as defined in subdivision
two of section four hundred fifty-nine-a of the social services law, to
a federal, state or local agency; or assessing any demerit, occurrence,
any other point, or deductions from an allotted bank of time, which
subjects or could subject an employee to disciplinary action, which may
include but not be limited to failure to receive a promotion or loss of
pay.

(b) If after investigation the commissioner finds that an employer or
person has violated any provision of this section, the commissioner may,
by an order which shall describe particularly the nature of the
violation, assess the employer or person a civil penalty of not less
than one thousand nor more than ten thousand dollars provided, however,
that if the commissioner finds that the employer has violated the
provisions of this section in the preceding six years, he or she may
assess a civil penalty of not less than one thousand nor more than
twenty thousand dollars. The commissioner may also order all appropriate
relief including enjoining the conduct of any person or employer;
ordering payment of liquidated damages to the employee by the person or
entity in violation; and, where the person or entity in violation is an
employer ordering rehiring or reinstatement of the employee to his or
her former position or an equivalent position, and an award of lost
compensation or an award of front pay in lieu of reinstatement and an
award of lost compensation. Liquidated damages shall be calculated as an
amount not more than twenty thousand dollars. The commissioner may
assess liquidated damages on behalf of every employee aggrieved under
this section, in addition to any other remedies permitted by this
section.

(c) This section shall not apply to employees of the state or any
municipal subdivisions or departments thereof.

2. (a) An employee may bring a civil action in a court of competent
jurisdiction against any employer or persons alleged to have violated
the provisions of this section. The court shall have jurisdiction to
restrain violations of this section, within two years after such
violation, regardless of the dates of employment of the employee, and to
order all appropriate relief, including enjoining the conduct of any
person or employer; ordering payment of liquidated damages, costs and
reasonable attorneys' fees to the employee by the person or entity in
violation; and, where the person or entity in violation is an employer,
ordering rehiring or reinstatement of the employee to his or her former
position with restoration of seniority or an award of front pay in lieu
of reinstatement, and an award of lost compensation and damages, costs
and reasonable attorneys' fees. Liquidated damages shall be calculated
as an amount not more than twenty thousand dollars. The court shall
award liquidated damages to every employee aggrieved under this section,
in addition to any other remedies permitted by this section. The statute
of limitations shall be tolled from the date an employee files a
complaint with the commissioner or the commissioner commences an
investigation, whichever is earlier, until an order to comply issued by
the commissioner becomes final, or where the commissioner does not issue
an order, until the date on which the commissioner notifies the
complainant that the investigation has concluded. Investigation by the
commissioner shall not be a prerequisite to nor a bar against a person
bringing a civil action under this section.

(b) At or before the commencement of any action under this section,
notice thereof shall be served upon the attorney general by the
employee.

3. Any employer or his or her agent, or the officer or agent of any
corporation, partnership, or limited liability company, or any other
person who violates subdivision one of this section shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor.


SECTION 652
Minimum wage
Labor (LAB) CHAPTER 31, ARTICLE 19
§ 652. Minimum wage. 1. Statutory. Every employer shall pay to each
of its employees for each hour worked a wage of not less than:

$4.25 on and after April 1, 1991,

$5.15 on and after March 31, 2000,

$6.00 on and after January 1, 2005,

$6.75 on and after January 1, 2006,

$7.15 on and after January 1, 2007,

$8.00 on and after December 31, 2013,

$8.75 on and after December 31, 2014,

$9.00 on and after December 31, 2015, and until December 31, 2016, or,
if greater, such other wage as may be established by federal law
pursuant to 29 U.S.C. section 206 or its successors
or such other wage as may be established in accordance with the
provisions of this article.

(a) New York City. (i) Large employers. Every employer of eleven or
more employees shall pay to each of its employees for each hour worked
in the city of New York a wage of not less than:

$11.00 per hour on and after December 31, 2016,

$13.00 per hour on and after December 31, 2017,

$15.00 per hour on and after December 31, 2018, or, if greater, such
other wage as may be established by federal law pursuant to 29 U.S.C.
section 206 or its successors or such other wage as may be established
in accordance with the provisions of this article.

(ii) Small employers. Every employer of ten or less employees shall
pay to each of its employees for each hour worked in the city of New
York a wage of not less than:

$10.50 per hour on and after December 31, 2016,

$12.00 per hour on and after December 31, 2017,

$13.50 per hour on and after December 31, 2018,

$15.00 per hour on and after December 31, 2019, or, if greater, such
other wage as may be established by federal law pursuant to 29 U.S.C.
section 206 or its successors or such other wage as may be established
in accordance with the provisions of this article.

(b) Remainder of downstate. Every employer shall pay to each of its
employees for each hour worked in the counties of Nassau, Suffolk and
Westchester a wage not less than:

$10.00 per hour on and after December 31, 2016,

$11.00 per hour on and after December 31, 2017,

$12.00 per hour on and after December 31, 2018,

$13.00 per hour on and after December 31, 2019,

$14.00 per hour on and after December 31, 2020,

$15.00 per hour on and after December 31, 2021,

or, if greater, such other wage as may be established by federal law
pursuant to 29 U.S.C. section 206 or its successors or such other wage
as may be established in accordance with the provisions of this article.

(c) Remainder of state. Every employer shall pay to each of its
employees for each hour worked outside of the city of New York and the
counties of Nassau, Suffolk, and Westchester, a wage of not less than:

$9.70 on and after December 31, 2016,

$10.40 on and after December 31, 2017,

$11.10 on and after December 31, 2018,

$11.80 on and after December 31, 2019,

$12.50 on and after December 31, 2020,

and on each following December thirty-first up to and until December
31, 2022, a wage published by the commissioner on or before October
first, based on the then current minimum wage increased by a percentage
determined by the director of the budget in consultation with the
commissioner, with the result rounded to the nearest five cents,
totaling no more than fifteen dollars, where the percentage increase
shall be based on indices including, but not limited to, (i) the rate of
inflation for the most recent twelve month period ending June of that
year based on the consumer price index for all urban consumers on a
national and seasonally unadjusted basis (CPI-U), or a successor index
as calculated by the United States department of labor, (ii) the rate of
state personal income growth for the prior calendar year, or a successor
index, published by the bureau of economic analysis of the United States
department of commerce, or (iii) wage growth; or, if greater, such other
wage as may be established by federal law pursuant to 29 U.S.C. section
206 or its successors or such other wage as may be established in
accordance with the provisions of this article.

(d) The rates and schedules established in paragraphs (a) and (b) of
this subdivision shall not be deemed to be the minimum wage under this
subdivision for purposes of the calculations specified in subdivisions
one and two of section five hundred twenty-seven of this chapter.

1-a. Annual minimum wage from January 1, 2024 to December 31, 2026.

(a) New York city. Notwithstanding subdivision one of this section,
every employer regardless of size shall pay to each of its employees for
each hour worked in the city of New York a wage of not less than:

$16.00 on and after January 1, 2024,

$16.50 on and after January 1, 2025,

$17.00 on and after January 1, 2026, or, if greater, such other wage
as may be established by federal law pursuant to 29 U.S.C. section 206
or its successors or such other wage as may be established in accordance
with the provisions of this article.

(b) Remainder of downstate. Notwithstanding subdivision one of this
section, every employer shall pay to each of its employees for each hour
worked in the counties of Nassau, Suffolk, and Westchester, a wage of
not less than:

$16.00 on and after January 1, 2024,

$16.50 on and after January 1, 2025,

$17.00 on and after January 1, 2026, or, if greater, such other wage
as may be established by federal law pursuant to 29 U.S.C. section 206
or its successors or such other wage as may be established in accordance
with the provisions of this article.

(c) Remainder of state. Notwithstanding subdivision one of this
section, every employer shall pay to each of its employees for each hour
worked outside the city of New York and the counties of Nassau, Suffolk,
and Westchester, a wage of not less than:

$15.00 on and after January 1, 2024,

$15.50 on and after January 1, 2025,

$16.00 on and after January 1, 2026, or, if greater, such other wage
as may be established by federal law pursuant to 29 U.S.C. section 206
or its successors or such other wage as may be established in accordance
with the provisions of this article.

1-b. Annual minimum wage increase beginning on January first, two
thousand twenty-seven. (a) New York city. On and after January first,
two thousand twenty-seven, every employer regardless of size shall pay
to each of its employees for each hour worked in the city of New York, a
wage of not less than the adjusted minimum wage rate established
annually by the commissioner. Such adjusted minimum wage rate shall be
determined by increasing the then current year's minimum wage rate by
the rate of change in the average of the three most recent consecutive
twelve-month periods between the first of August and the thirty-first of
July, each over their preceding twelve-month periods published by the
United States department of labor non-seasonally adjusted consumer price
index for northeast region urban wage earners and clerical workers
(CPI-W) or any successor index as calculated by the United States
department of labor, with the result rounded to the nearest five cents.

(b) Remainder of downstate. On and after January first, two thousand
twenty-seven, every employer shall pay to each of its employees for each
hour worked in the counties of Nassau, Suffolk, and Westchester, a wage
of not less than the adjusted minimum wage rate established annually by
the commissioner. Such adjusted minimum wage rate shall be determined by
increasing the then current year's minimum wage rate by the rate of
change in the average of the three most recent consecutive twelve-month
periods between the first of August and the thirty-first of July, each
over their preceding twelve-month periods published by the United States
department of labor non-seasonally adjusted consumer price index for the
northeast region urban wage earners and clerical workers (CPI-W) or any
successor index as calculated by the United States department of labor,
with the result rounded to the nearest five cents.

(c) Remainder of state. On and after January first, two thousand
twenty-seven, every employer shall pay to each of its employees for each
hour worked outside of the city of New York and the counties of Nassau,
Suffolk, and Westchester a wage of not less than the adjusted minimum
wage rate established annually by the commissioner. Such adjusted
minimum wage rate shall be determined by increasing the then current
year's minimum wage rate by the rate of change in the average of the
three most recent consecutive twelve-month periods between the first of
August and the thirty-first of July, each over their preceding
twelve-month periods published by the United States department of labor
non-seasonally adjusted consumer price index for northeast region urban
wage earners and clerical workers (CPI-W) or any successor index as
calculated by the United States department of labor, with the result
rounded to the nearest five cents.

(d) Exceptions. Effective January first, two thousand twenty-seven and
thereafter, notwithstanding paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of this
subdivision, there shall be no increase in the minimum wage in the state
for the following year if any of the following conditions are met,
provided, however, that such exception shall be limited to no more than
two consecutive years:

(i) the rate of change in the average of the most recent period of the
first of August to the thirty-first of July over the preceding period of
the first of August to the thirty-first of July published by the United
States department of labor non-seasonally adjusted consumer price index
for the northeast region urban wage earners and clerical workers
(CPI-W), or any successor index as calculated by the United States
department of labor, is negative;

(ii) the three-month moving average of the seasonally adjusted New
York state unemployment rate as determined by the U-3 measure of labor
underutilization for the most recent period ending the thirty-first of
July as calculated by the United States department of labor rises by
one-half percentage point or more relative to its low during the
previous twelve months; or

(iii) seasonally adjusted, total non-farm employment for New York
state in July, calculated by the United States department of labor,
decreased from the seasonally adjusted, total non-farm employment for
New York state in April, and seasonally adjusted, total non-farm
employment for New York state in July, calculated by the United States
department of labor, decreased from the seasonally adjusted, total
non-farm employment for New York state in January.

(e) The commissioner shall publish the adjusted minimum wage rates no
later than the first of October of each year to take effect on the
following first day of January.

2. Existing wage orders. The minimum wage orders in effect on the
effective date of this act shall remain in full force and effect, except
as modified in accordance with the provisions of this article; provided,
however, that the minimum wage order for farm workers codified at part
one hundred ninety of title twelve of the New York code of rules and
regulations in effect on January first, two thousand twenty shall be
deemed to be a wage order established and adopted under this article and
shall remain in full force and effect except as modified in accordance
with the provisions of this article or article nineteen-A of this
chapter.

Such minimum wage orders shall be modified by the commissioner to
increase all monetary amounts specified therein in the same proportion
as the increase in the hourly minimum wage as provided in subdivisions
one, one-a, and one-b of this section, including the amounts specified
in such minimum wage orders as allowances for gratuities, and when
furnished by the employer to its employees, for meals, lodging, apparel
and other such items, services and facilities. All amounts so modified
shall be rounded off to the nearest five cents. The modified orders
shall be promulgated by the commissioner without a public hearing, and
without reference to a wage board, and shall become effective on the
effective date of such increases in the minimum wage except as otherwise
provided in this subdivision, notwithstanding any other provision of
this article.

3. Non-profitmaking institutions. (a) Application of article. This
article shall apply to non-profitmaking institutions.

(b) Option available to non-profitmaking institutions. The provisions
of any wage order issued under this article shall not apply, however, to
any non-profitmaking institution which pays and continues to pay to each
of its employees in every occupation a wage, exclusive of allowances, of
not less than the minimum wage provided in subdivision one of this
section provided that such institution had certified under oath to the
commissioner, on or before September first, nineteen hundred sixty, that
on or before October first, nineteen hundred sixty it would pay and
thereafter intended to pay such wage to each of its employees in every
occupation and provided further that all the provisions of this article
have not become applicable to such institution by operation of paragraph
(c) of this subdivision. If such institution was not organized or did
not hire any employees as defined in subdivision five of section six
hundred fifty-one of this chapter before September first, nineteen
hundred sixty, such provisions shall not apply so long as, commencing
six months after it was organized, or first employed such employees it
paid and continues to pay such wage to each of its employees in every
occupation, provided that such institution certified under oath within
six months after it was organized or first employed such employees that
it would pay and thereafter intended to pay such wage to each of its
employees in every occupation and provided further that all the
provisions of this article have not become applicable to such
institution by operation of paragraph (c) of this subdivision.

(c) Termination of option. All the provisions of this article,
including all of the provisions of any wage order issued thereunder
which, but for the operation of paragraph (b) of this subdivision, would
apply to any non-profitmaking institution, shall become fully applicable
to such institution sixty days after such institution files a notice
with the commissioner requesting that the provisions of such wage order
apply to it, or immediately upon the issuance of an order by the
commissioner finding that such institution has failed to pay the wages
provided in paragraph (b) of this subdivision, but in no event shall any
such order discharge the obligation of such institution to pay the wages
provided by paragraph (b) of this subdivision for any period prior to
the issuance of such order.

4. Notwithstanding subdivisions one, one-a, one-b, and two of this
section, the wage for an employee who is a food service worker receiving
tips shall be a cash wage of at least two-thirds of the minimum wage
rates set forth in subdivision one of this section, rounded to the
nearest five cents or seven dollars and fifty cents, whichever is
higher, provided that the tips of such an employee, when added to such
cash wage, are equal to or exceed the minimum wage in effect pursuant to
subdivisions one, one-a, and one-b of this section and provided further
that no other cash wage is established pursuant to section six hundred
fifty-three of this article.

5. Notwithstanding subdivisions one, one-a, one-b, and two of this
section, meal and lodging allowances for a food service worker receiving
a cash wage pursuant to subdivision four of this section shall not
increase more than two-thirds of the increase required by subdivision
two of this section as applied to state wage orders in effect pursuant
to subdivisions one, one-a, and one-b of this section.

6. Notwithstanding subdivision one of this section, and sections six
hundred fifty-three and six hundred fifty-five of this article, on or
after January first, two thousand nineteen, and each January first
thereafter until such time as the minimum wage is fifteen dollars in all
areas of the state, the division of budget shall conduct an analysis of
the state of the economy in each region, and the effect of the minimum
wage increases listed in this section, to determine whether there should
be a temporary suspension or delay in any scheduled increases. In
conducting its analysis, the division of budget shall consult the
department, the department's division of research and statistics, the
United States department of labor, the federal reserve bank of New York
and other economic experts. The division of budget will reference
well-established economic indexes and accepted economic factors,
including those set forth in section six hundred fifty-four of this
article, to justify and explain its decision. After reviewing such
indexes and factors, the division shall determine whether scheduled
increases in the minimum wage shall continue up to and including fifteen
dollars. The division of budget will issue a report and recommendation
to the commissioner, who shall take action on that report and
recommendation pursuant to section six hundred fifty-six of this
article.